# exactly one input controller

This is a tautology. It's axiomatic. It's true because we say it is.
If we decide we need more than one, we will re-arrange our terms.



# exactly one button area

We can't imagine ever wanting more than one. It's not a plain old component,
it's a visual representation of the strong abstract idea that there is only
ever a limited set of input commands that can be issued from any given (real)
state of the interface. The fact that we use a metaphor of "buttons" to
represent this abstract idea seems mostly useful but it can also be a leaky
abstraction. It's less like having (both) the buttons on your coffee maker and
the buttons on your microwave within your reach. It's more like, what if you
could only operate your coffee maker and microwave from your phone, with its
limited screen real estate.

As we figure out an architecture for deeply nesting components and custom



# pondering selection (now "focus")

The idea of a "selection" that "moves" is a concept built pretty deeply
into the toolkit, and is one that exists mostly orthogonally to the concern
of processing the business actions: "alphabet plus enter" keypresses.

This just in: we call this "focus" (not "selection") now.

Thus far (before recursive nesting), component classes do not (YET) have to
model how they react (action functions, state changes) to the four directional
keypresses.

Thus far, this has been the job of the "selection controller", which decides
whether the keypress means anything at the moment (ignore `KEY_DOWN` when the
bottommost item is selected, and then sends transition names to the components
so they can return to the non-selected state.

As we enter recursive nesting, we add nuance to this model in at least two ways:

1. horizontal movement becomes a thing
2. we want sub-components to be able to assume control of receiving &
   processing direction keypresses

Now, requirements (1) & (2) don't even necessarily have to relate to each
other: It could be that we would want a special kind of component that
reacts to horizontal keypresses (like say you wanted to display two
checkboxes per row). Occam's razor would hold that we not immediately marry
this requirement to the other one.

BUT, as it is working out in our head, we in fact want to predicate (1)
on (2); that is, if a component wants to do something freaky with the
arrow keys, it has to present as a "semi-autonomous-component".



# Introducing Semi-Autonomous Components (SACs)

Thus far, the only type of semi-autonomous component we have seen has been
the compound component (and as yet it doesn't implement whatever this
SAC interface will be fully). What are SACs? What are they autonomous over?

- Remember there is only one (universal (but not global)) input controller.
- Remember there is max one button controller (same as area right now).

So mainly, what they are is:

- They can enter a mode where they intercept directional keypresses
- They have a new namespace for their components, and interpret business
  keypresses accordingly

Additionally,

- We might shoehorn-in the ability to inject a conditionality function
  for buttons ("ask me whether or not to display the button, for each
  button on this page" or ..)
- They might introduce a new wrinkle in our harness-assited rendering (holes)



# As such, implementation consequences:

- It's not for the input controller to decide what input triggers a mode-
  change into semi-autonomus mode of a component; it's the component.
  Components are behind a wall where they can't "reach upwards" to tell
  the input controller what to do. So this mode change will happen through
  a host directive (addressed to the input controller)


- It's somehow arbitrary actions that the component responds to



# Technical Appendix: changes structure syntax

Our `changes` "patch algebra" is a fundamental underpinning to every
interaction that changes state in the interface; which is to say almost
every interaction.

At writing (in this is in motion at writing), a formal `response` structure
is the result (generally) of two kinds of things:
  - processing input
  - processing changes

Every response has the possibility to hold a "changes" patch structure
(specified below). Because our function for processing changes itself returns
a response of this same structure, processing changes can lead to yet another
patch structure of new changes an so on (that can possibly infinite loop).

How we process almost every interaction (every meaningful input) is that we
dispatch the input to a recipient controller, receive its response, and then
we enter in to a loop of processing the changes from that response, processing
any changes from *that* and so on until there are no more changes to apply,
at which point we typically break out of the loop, update the display
and block for more input.

("quit" is the only exception we can think of to the above. "quit" is a
special host directive that turns a flag to off. our processing of host
directives is hard-coded at the moment. More on host directives below.)

So it is the case that every response structure has a `changes` attribute.
But not every response will have this attribute set (it maybe be `None`).

(We will use `changes` and "patch structure" interchangably here.)

The patch structure is a tuple of tuples. The outer tuple is a simple list
of its consituent items: the outer tuple is a list of "change directives"
(each of which is itself a tuple).

Pseudo-EBNF:

    changes = change_directive { change_directive } ;

Each "change directive" is itself a tuple, whose first component is a
string representing the intended recipient controller of the directive:

    change_directive = recipient [..more..]

At the moment, there are exactly these four recipients that can be indicated:
(EDIT: probably scrap this)

    recipient = "input_controller"
              | "selection_controller"
              | "buttons_controller"
              | "host_directive"

The next thing is the directive name:

    change_directive = recipient, directive_name [..more..]


Consult your recipient controller for the directives they support. (We have
since changed things so at the moment of writing there is only one possible
recipient: the input controller, which now acts as a more intelligent (read:
hard-coded) router of patches. But for now we are leaving the "recipient"
field (which is always `input_controller` for now) in case we want to more
freely federate patch-handling again.)

    # (undedefined symbols below are considered to be self-documenting by name)

    directive = input_controller_directive | parent_area_direc | host_directive

    input_controller_directive = 'input_controller' IC_rhs
    parent_area_direc = 'parent_area_direc' PA_rhs
    host_directive = 'host_directive' HD_rhs

    IC_rhs =
      | "change_focus"  current_component_key fml desired_component_key cbpk
      | "change_buttons" related_component_key cbpk
      | "apply_business_buttonpress" button_label
      | "push_receiver" SAC_key
      | "pop_receiver" SAC_key

    PA_rhs =
      | "translate_area" recip typ comp_k h w y x *rest

    HD_rhs =
      | "enter_text_field_modal" y x h w
      | "quit"

    # cbpk = component buttons page key
    # fml = component key to use in the context of changing the buttons
    # SAC_key = semi-autonomous component key (SAC's explained in section above)


# (document-meta)

  - #born
