# Objective & Scope

- experiment in semi-generated interfaces (revisiting an old flame)
- we will want something like this for our "data explorer" thing
- the grand innovation of semi-isomorphic interfacing
- curses for the thrill of curses



# Overview of imagined premises

- Interfaces can be represented abstractly as treelike structures, starting
  from the root of the application (the whole thing) to every little checkbox
- So the theory goes (and the theory seems sound), a sufficiently detailed
  abstract representation of an interface can be used to generate *entirely*
  an 80% good-enough actual interface for any variety of "modalities":
  non-interactive CLI ("niCLI"), non-curses interatactive CLI, curses, web,
  GUI, watch, NLP AI, etc.
- (However, our scope will not be to prove this for all modalities or even
  any; our scope is to 1) experiment with rolling out such an AST and start
  to feel what it feels like 2) see how far we can get with producing an actual
  ncurses interface automatically from the niCLI [sl] "cheap arg parse"
  formals structure. We believe we should be able to accomplish this.)



# Imagined vocabulary and key principles

                  +-------------------------------------
    top row: nav: |      [..] foo > bar > baz
                  +-------------------------------------
                  |          some field:  Foo bar baz
    middle area   |       some checkbox:  [ ]
    form fields   |      some poly opts:
    splay:        |              [name]:  [value]
                  |
                  |-------------------------------------
    context-sens  |
    action        |
    "buttons"     |   [s]end  [b]ack  [q]uit
                  +-------------------------------------


- Up and Down arrows go up and down the selectable components ("selectables")
- The context-sensitive action buttons change
- Some remain fixed like the bottom row (but may become unelectable)
- To keep things simple in one way and make them complicated in another,
  there will be "inbound constraints"



# Quick summary of candidates for reserved hotkeys (rough sketch)

- [b]ack
- [c]ancel (might swap in for [b]ack)
- [d]one (like back)
- [e]xit (reserved)
- [q]uit
- [s]{end/ubmit}



# Types of selectable and their interface interactions

Abbreviations used here:

- dwa: disallowed when appropriate


Emerging key concepts:

(EDIT: the next two paragraphs contradict)

There isn't a hard concept of "selected". Each "selectable" component has a
concept of an "initial state" and it receives soft events like "mouse over"
and "mouse leave", or relevant buttons pressed. It changes its own state
as a response to these events; and state changes result in different visual
representation and different buttons available.

However, there *is* a sort of implicit idea of "selected" because only
one component at any given time can change the display of available
hotkeys (and also, the available hotkeys (buttons))


The selectables:

- Top row nav
  - hmm
- Plain old field
  - when mouse over:
    - [enter] for edit
  - when editing:
    - [whatever this emacs thing is]
- Checkbox (i.e from flag):
  - when mouse over:
    - [enter] to toggle
- Poly opts (label):
  - when mouse over:
    - [a]dd (inserts item at top, selects, enters edit mode)
- Poly option (item):
  - when mouse over:
    - [enter] to edit
    - [d]elete (confirms with a [y]es/[c]ancel)
    - move item [u]p
    - move item [d]own
  - when entered:
    - [left arrow] mouse over name (DWA)
    - [right arrow] mouse over value (DWA)
  - when mouse over name
    - [enter] to edit name
  - when mouse over value
    - [enter] to edit value
  - when editing name: emacs thing
  - when editing value: emacs thing


We are attempting to draw up a state machine for each of these [#HERE]



# Inappropriately adaptive UI:

Every component with a visual representation (so, all of them) must be able
to report its minimum required height and width. Branch components do the
necessary addition of the metrics of their child components (and this
happens recursively) to determine their own size constraints. (And note that
some branch components may have to do additional cleverness with how they
manage outlines they have to draw..)

We can pre-calculate the constraints of the interface before we even enter
screen mode; but we can't know the current dimensions of the screen until
once we are in screen mode. If we enter screen mode and see that the screen
is too small (in one or both dimensions) for our interface, we want to exit
with a detailed error message explaining the necessary dimension(s).

Now, an immutability must be followed for this to keep making sense and
working: properties that effect the constraints of components must be
immutable for the lifetime of the component; so, if a field component's
width constraint is informed by its label text, the label text can't change
for any given field ever (without some clever programming that follows
these principles), and so on. (But keep reading..)



## Weirdly :[#608.2.B]

Weirdly (and experimentally), we are going to allow that some UI behavior can
be informed by arbitrary screen metrics:

If a text field doesn't explicity model its own *maximum* string value length,
this constraint can be informed by the on-screen metrics: A screen that is
wider can allow for wider text field value strings.

We are imagining this provision because it's what ~feels~ most intuitive and
obvious; but it presents some gotchas: if you "edit a model" of a thing when
your screen is at some certain wide width; you exit the interface, and size
your screen down to narrower, then you try to edit the same model; the
interface could fail to open because it can't meet the size constraints of
the model!

(The curses idea of a `pad` seems designed to solve problems like these,
but we want to avoid interfaces that require paging up / paging down etc,
(or a CSS-like idea of "overflow") as long as we can.)

This same dynamic will affect growable lists in both directions: How many
items can be added to a growable list will be informed by how high the
screen is. The constraint of vertical height for the interface will be
informed by how many items are in growable lists.



## But you said immutable

Yes, properties that effect the dimensions *can* change; but we must make
sure they change according to the *maximum* constraints in those dimensions
(the available space). In theory this same principle could apply if you really
wanted a field whose label you changed dynamically.



# Other features:

In the same spirit that there is an "isomorphism" between corresponding
interfaces in niCLI and ncurses, we want to explore the isomorphisms between
"requests" on both sides.

Put another way, we want to see what it is like to use the ncurses interface
to (in effect) *edit* a command line buffer.

The purpose of this isn't just pure novelty; it's so we can (in effect) save
the state of complicated forms and reproduce them easily during development.

There is a chance also that such an isomorphism could be leveraged internally
for sending requests; but we'd rather avoid that architecture; opting instead
for the way niCLI does things with `vals`.



# Complicated algorithm details: Auto-generating buttons :[#608.2.B]

The emerging principle seems to be that every *type* of component (not
component) is associated with a formal state machine for interactions, and
that the transitions in these state machines more-or-less determine what
buttons should be available from any associated state.

This sounds simple enough, but it gets more challenging with these dimensions:

We need to know every possible "page" of dynamic buttons we might want to
show before we concretize, so that we have a contract that ensures us the
screen real-estate we will need for the most buttons we will ever need
to show.

Glancing at [#608.9], it appears that (for example) `("[e]nter to edit",)`
makes at least two appearances. We conjecture that that IFF two pages have
identical buttons in the same order, then these pages are indeed fungible,
being functionally identical. (When the input controller receives a keypress,
it's got to be able to get from it back to a transition on the current node.)

so FFSA nodes have a many-to-one relationshp with pages of buttons. So
there's some weird caching we would do where we would probably want to use
as a key a tuple of button strings.

It's common to have multiple components of the same type in the same
compound area (for example; multiple checkboxes, multiple text fields). It
would be ugly to generate the same set of pages multiple times for these
components that share a type (and so an FFSA), so really we want to
probably cache but lazily generate these pages of buttons, and associate
them in a one-page-to-one-formal node manner. If you lazily autovivify,
you should autovivify all the pages for all the nodes in the FFSA in one
step because the thing about concretizing needing to know beforehand any
possible page you might want to show.

So finally, putting all this together, for a given compound area:

1. The set of all interactable components in your compound area implies
   the set of all participating interactable component *types*. At writing
   there are only four or five component types that we have ever even
   conceived of for this domain. Your set is the relevant subset of this set
   of four or five. For example, maybe you have two checkboxes and one field,
   so your set of component types is `{checkbox, text_field}`.

2. The set of component types implies a set of necessary button pages like
   so: each component type has its FFSA, and each FFSA has its nodes, and
   each node implies a page of buttons from its departing transitions
   (somehow).

3. The *list* of pages implied by every node in every participating FFSA,
   it may have duplicate pages. So we end up with a mapping from node to
   page that is *custom generated* per compound area. So, the pages might
   have names like `buttons_page_1`, `buttons_page_2`; the names and order
   will be meaningless but the point is that each formal node will need to
   know (map to) its page for this compound area. (it looks like text-field
   and checkbox will require about one page each of buttons; but the
   poly-option thing might have more like six pages of buttons.) This mapping
   will of course need to be housed in the compound area somewhere; not
   in the FFSA; because the set of pages we will need changes from interface
   to interface.

4. If you have a directive like `'buttons', 'auto'` in your definition,
   it can't be resolved in the first traversal of the definition structure;
   it has to be deferred until all components definitions are turned into
   abstract areas (or at least until we know the set from (1)).



# Appendix: Magic Names (ordered alphabetical by name) :[#608.2.C]

- the component with the key `buttons`; this name is magic; this component
  also doubles as the buttons controller for now.

- the component with the key `flash_area`

- the attribute name `state` in concrete areas: hackish way to signal
  that it's interactable in the formal sense. (Note buttons are weird)



# (document-meta)

  - #born
