---
title: case numbers
date: 2018-07-21T14:59:13-04:00
---

We can imagine a coverage testing cool that maps lines of code to tests
that cover them.

In lieu of having that right now, we experiment with a variety of
conventions that associate test code with "asset code" through comment
annotation. Broadly these conventions carry these objectives:

* 👉 During "development time", such mappings can direct the developer
quickly from a failing test to the code formally responsible for effecting
the associated feature.

* 👉 Long after "development time", the mappings can provide documentation
value when traversed in the other direction: by relating asset code _back_
to test code that (when written right) can describe specified behavior or
add more context to the feature.



## brief history, then synthesis

Our original answer to this was to annotate participating tests and asset
code locations with tags like `#coverpoint1.3`. (Typically the coverpoint's
major number corresponded to a test *file* and the minor number corresponded
to a particular "test".)

(An intermediate convention, where the major numbers would procede downwards
over development time, is buried at #history-A.1.)

Separately, going back to the beginning of our using python (also `unittest`),
we developed the convention of naming our test cases (classes) with names
that began like `CaseNNN` (e.g. `Case100`, `Case200`). This convention existed
only to realize [#010.6] regression-friendly test ordering (because the test
runner runs the cases and tests in lexical order, not "code-order").

This convention was employed only on a file-by-file basis, with no concern
for whether there were name collisions across files — multiple test files
could each have their own `Case100` and so on.

But some time in the last few months, the concert of these two conventions
began to show strain against some or another sub-project. Probably the
confluence of forces was like this:

* 👉 We began to appreciate the primacy of the test _case_ over the _test_
(or _assertion_, for that matter).

* 👉 We had a workflow where we would splay out many several of test case`
sketches (descriptions) at once.

The combined effort of coming up with new case numbers _and_ case descriptions
_and_ `#coverpoint` number allocations began to feel redundant. Although
maintaining the separate systems had one advantage, on balance it seemed
like too much bureaucratic red tape and code noise having all these different
conventions flying around each other.



## Introduction to the convention

* 👉 Give test case classes names like `Case1234_homunculous_chungus` and
refer to the test case from the code with strings like `(Case1234)`
(with the parenthesis). Include a soft description of the test case in
the comment where doing so adds value; but note we do _not_ use the full
class name in the reference: doing this reduces the code impact that comes
from the inevitable improvements, refinements or pivots in behavior that
happen to test cases and the descriptive tail of their class names.

* 👉 Four-digit case numbers are the new default. We employ three-digit case
numbers for some projects that we expect to say small. If a sub-project
needs five-digit case numbers, it's too large.

* 👉 Like the "bandplan" for the FM radio frequency range, the case number
space must have at least a rough (if not nested) sub-divison plan for which
kinds of test cases will go where along the number span, governed by the
expected regression-friendly order of the test cases (i.e., cases that test
lower-level functionality execute earlier when being run in forward order).



## In Practice

Managing a crowded test number space is the most tedious aspect of this
convention.

* 👉 Sometimes we write little python oneliners that divide up the
numberspace and produce numbers (often midpoints, sometimes boundaries)
representing the allocated segments. Sometimes these appear in `readme.md`
files (lowercase intentional) _weirdly in the same directory_ as tests.

* 👉 In practice we freqently use placeholder identifiers for test cases
(maybe `CaseXXA`, `CaseXXB`..) until we make our commit, because it's
impossible to predict beforehand the exact constituency of the test cases.



## Should we consider expanding this numberspace to be ecosystem-wide?

No.



## Then how can we refer to test cases across the sub-projects?

As of #history-A.1 this writing we employ a convention of "locking" a
test case to the "universe" by appending the project's "monogram" to the
*end* of the test case identifier. (Change the class name accordngly too).
So to "lock" `Case1234` to the universe, if it's from sub-project
"underground-resistance", the name becomes `Case1234UR`.

* 👉 We can't put the mongram at the very beginning or in the middle because
it messes up the lexical ordering that the vendor test runner does.

* 👉 We can't use underscores in the identifier because an underscore is
what is necessary to separate the identifier part from the descriptive tail
of the class name.

* 👉 We'll worry about monogram name collisions IFF we ever get to that bridge.

* 👉 Don't use test case identifiers across project boundaries to refer to
high-level features; also don't use them if you find yourself needing the
identifier more than (say) two times outside of the sub-project. For these
cases, allocate a [#002] documentation identifier.




## (document-meta)

  - #history-A.1: full rewrite for new convention
  - #born.
