---
title: The Magnetics Convention
date: 2020-05-22T13:59:32-04:00
---
A "magnetic" is simply a function that is named and housed following our
"magentics" pattern. The convention has some conceptual parallels with
"Goal-Oriented Action Planning" (GOAP) and PDDL (both mentioned again below).

The "magentics" pattern is:
  - the function has a name with "via" in the middle
  - the front of the name communicates the function's result
  - the end of the name communicates the function's arguments
  - for example `area_via_width_and_height`
  - (names can be more narrative than strict)
  - the function lives in a module with a name like "magnetics"



## Advantages

We follow this convention (to the extent that we do) because over time
we have found it offers these advantages:

  - Self-documentation
  - It reinforces forward-thinking design
  - It reinforces algorithm decomposition in the context of the whole

(As an aside, at writing our project has about 67 files named following
this convention. That's the number of non-test files found with:

```
find . -type f -name '*_via_*.py'
```
)



### Self-documentation

Functions with names like this generally achieve a good level of self-
documentation in the context of a larger, generally understood algorithm
or domain.

Consider a name like `new_user_via_username_and_group` versus a name like
`create_user`. The former implies the later but also communicates immediately
what its return value is and what the prerequisites for creating a user
(via this function). Indeed, some functions using this convention may have
no benefit from any further documentation at all.



### It can reinforce forward-thinking design

Under this convention you generally know the name of the function before
you begin writing it; and so before you begin writing it, you must (as
a corollary) know its objective end-result and arguments. This generally
reinforces a good floor for forward-thinking in your design.

Imagine that you know you need a "create user" function, but you don't yet
know what your formal arguments are. Under this system and such a case, you
shouldn't be writing the function yet, but rather designing the algorithm.



### It can reinforce balanced algorithm decomposition in the context of the whole

This convention can reinforce decomposing big algorithms into constituent,
high-level functions, using the language of your business domain
(specifically, objects not verbs).

Names like this look "outward" into how the piece fits in to the whole,
instead of (for example) looking "inward" at how they work.

(Why this is good is left unexplained for now.)




### Self-documentation at a higher level (maybe)

This self-documentation can occur at a macro-level as well: To an astute
reader of a thoughtfully constructed module of magnetics, the reader may
be able to back-derive what the high-level algorithm is, just from the names
of the magnetics alone.

For a contrived but didactic example, imagine these magnetics (files):

```
magnetics
├── codec_via_codec_name_string.py
├── input_file_via_input_file_path.py
└── output_file_via_input_file_and_codec.py
```

From the names, we can see that:
  - the output file comes from an input file and a codec
  - a codec comes from a "codec name string"
  - an input file comes from an input file path

If we start from the axiom that an output file is the desired endpoint,
we can see what intermediate products we can derive from our current state,
recursively until we get to something that look like input arguments:
a codec name string and an input file path.

(A formal treatment of how we came up with this will be hinted at below..)




## Disadvantages & other considerations:

  - CON: the urge to name functions using verbs dies hard. This warrants its
    own discussion...

  - CON: When it's a magnetic in a file (as it frequently is) and you come up
    with better names for the arguments or the result, or you change the
    signature of the function, you have to rename the file. Hopefully this
    does not encourage sclerosis.

  - This is similar to (but in reverse order from) the popular naming
    convention of `foo2bar` seen in unix utilities. Our way is better because
    it keeps ugly numbers out of symbol names, and because the "sides" are
    physically closer to the parts of code they describe.

  - There's an argument to be made that [..] weakly typed




## The origin of the name

In another project we had a sort of plug-in or adapter pattern. It was
straightforward to want to name the files after the input formats they
implemented adapters for. One advantage became clear:

  - there was a one-to-one mapping between what formats were supported
    and the constituency of files in a folder. This was pleasingly DRY.

We adopted this naming pattern for more general use beyond just this
adapter pattern. In particular, there was a relatively complex natural
language production pipeline somewhere and we were trying to unify several
different libraries that did similar but different things. We were able to
unify these disparate efforts by designing a uniform domain language and
renaming all the files accordingly.

It occured to us that we could try to "solve" for certain target products
given whatever particular arguments by doing some pathfinding algorithm over
the graph formed by the available transitions. (This was mostly just a novel
experiment; it seemed to leave open some possibilities of non-determinancy..)

Around time time, we saw (on imgur.com) an animation of a bunch of magnets
(in space?) coalescing together organically. The name "clicked" for us and
we renamed tons of files in this way.

As this convention became more widespread in our own work, we found it useful
to break down many of high-level algorithms with this technique, by hopping
from the input (objects or streams) to intermediate products (e.g. streams)
successively towards some end result, decomposing each transition recursively
until it felt to be of a manageable complexity to develop as a unit.




## Real-world parallels: GOAP and PDDL

About 5 years after conceiving of this convention for our own work (and
coming up with some "pathfinding" pseudo-AI problem solving experiments);
we discovered that GOAP and PDDL sounded exactly like what we had come up
with. (But it sounds like these technologies have solved the pathfinding
part of it with quite a bit more rigor and formality, most likely..)




## (document-meta)

  - #born.
