# Objective & Scope of This Document

Currently this document is a scratch-space for notes about our
nascent "replication" "layer". Primarily we need a place to track
what URL's we're reading.

A secondary benefit (at first unintended) is that it gives us a deeper
understanding of vendor vernacular so we know what pitfalls to watch for
in terms of our own lexicon (the most pernicious example being "entity").


# Structure Of This Document

We construct a gripping narrative story-arc. At writing we don't know where
the story goes. But what we *do* know:

1. The story is linear. Sections follow one after another chronologically,
   tracking the chapters of the narrative story-arc.
1. We place the sections in reverse chronological order in the file, with the
   most recent sections occurring at the top; the rationale being that the
   most important information at any given development-day will typically be
   the most recent. As such, at this point, if this is your first reading
   you may want to jump to the last section and read each one backwards
   back up to here.


# Reminder - sections that follow this one are in reverse chronological order!

Reminder: sections that follow this one are in reverse chronological order!



# Now let's look at `floor` since we have mastered `room`

We Are Very Excited About This. We'll read the (longer)
[project's website][flo02] first, then the [package documentation][flo01]
second.

Random small observation at reading:
1. oo this is the first i've heard of a datamapper pattern here

Oh dang. The project's website is incomplete.



# How does the vendor encapsulate and expose the database connection?

It's .. sort of a lot but not that big a deal.



# Thirdly, we got to know the room *what*:

As an experimental exercise, in this section we enumerate the top-level
concepts from the vendor and see how they map (variously) to their own API
artifacts and (alternatively) how they map to our own imagined vaporware.

The advantge of my solutions is that they are better. The advantage of their
soultions is that they have corporeal reality -- they exist in the real world.

The summary of this whole section is that it's *my* belief (in contrast to
the vendor) that the word "entity" should correspond to a _single_ business
object slash database row, as opposed to the approach the vendor takes:
that "entity" refers to the whole model, not just a particular instance.

| The Thing      | Them                       | Me                             |
| -------------- | -------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| connection etc | Their "database class"     | ok fine                        |
| tables vs rows | They call tables "entites" | to me this is bad              |
| CURL functions | Data access objects        | see '"DAO" as a name' below    |

I reserve the right to change my personal stance on how I'll use the term
"entity" in this context.


## "DAO" as a name - "Collection" not "DAO"

- I hate redundant use of "object" (everthing is an object, so it's just
  a filler-word, indicating we couldn't think of a more meaninful noun.)
- I have done quite well calling it a "collection"
- This duality can be a secret - you can keep it to yourself


# Secondly, we got to know "room" (i.e. room *why?*)

The touted features of room in the below-cited landing page are (roughly):

1. It verifies SQL queries at compile-time
1. It DRY's up code with "annotations" (which sound like python decorators)
1. It offers migration paths for databases (what databases?)

Ok, sure: sounds good.


# In the beginning, we discovered "floor" then "room" (i.e room *how?*)

(We want to be able to answer the question "why".)

1. We googled "flutter sqlite example". Saw [Peter Coding's blog][pbl01] as
   the fifth hit.
1. We googled "flutter sqlite floor". First hit was the [package site][flo01].
1. The above links to the [project's website][flo02] which we'll look at later.
1. The same links to the [room persistence library][roo01].

The above offers this:

> Apps that handle non-trivial amounts of structured data can benefit
> greatly from persisting that data locally. The most common use case is
> to cache relevant pieces of data so that when the device cannot access
> the network, the user can still browse that content while they are offline.

For better or worse this is deeply validating for us to read now lol, because
the above summarizes exactly the itch we wanted to scratch in the first place:
a solution to a problem we imagined in our heads, the pursuit of which lead us
down this rabbit hole in the first place.


[roo01]: https://developer.android.com/training/data-storage/room
[pbl01]: https://petercoding.com/flutter/2021/03/21/using-sqlite-in-flutter/
[flo02]: https://pinchbv.github.io/floor/
[flo01]: https://pub.dev/packages/floor


# (document-meta)

- #born
