# Why this case study (and what is its objective)?

We encountered the trouble described in Step 1 below.

So the objective of this document is not *just* to capture XX but also to
capture *how* we arrived at the "correct" "answer".


# Step 1: Establish that there is a problem/challenge then describe the problem

In attempt to XX,
we copy-pasted the code that makes a responsive layout for the "favorites"
in the hope that it would "just work" for laying out the buttons.

The code at #birth captures our failed attempt. It:

- Issue 1: doesn't have a gap (margin/buffer/spacer) between buttons
- Issue 2: isn't centered in its container
- Issue 3: gets cut off at the bottom when it snaps into a single row

Furthermore we've never designed or fine-tuned the appearance of a button
in the first place, so this will be a time to learn about that problem-space
too. (That is, we need to learn about both inner-button and intra-button
UI implementation.)


# Step 2: "scout" for a documentation landscape and make a rough draft of it

Once we knew we had no idea what we were doing, we tried searching Aaround
for help to understand the code we had copy-pasted without understanding.


## THING QM: Video: Widget of the Week: Grid View
The first video:

Went to here https://api.flutter.dev/index.html and entered this:

    GridView

Found this [widget of the week video][linkQM] in the page for the GridView class.

Reading notes for this video are found in the next major section.


## THING QR: Video: SliverList and SliverGrid

Googled this:

    silvergriddelegate tutorial

Also Googled this:

    flutter sliver grid

Found this [video on SliverList and SliverGrid][linkQR].

This page that embeds the video also has an introductory description
to the "slivers" property.


## THING QF: Sliver workshop dartpad

Googled this:

    SliverGrid dartpad

Found this [dartpad][linkQF].


# READING NOTES!

We have our things assembled.


## The first video

The first [video][linkQM] ("Widget of the week: GridView"), rewatching it
is a bit humbling.

Doing it the `count` way, here's our comments on each thing:

- `children`: Ok. This is fine. we can have
- `crossAxisCount`: No. We don't want this. "The whole point" is not this.
- `mainAxisSpacing`: horizontal ("") spacing? No
- `crossAxisSpacing`: YES. (0:46) This solves "Issue 1" above. (e.g. `20`)


## The second video (and its page)

It links us to this page [about slivers][linkQL], which itself has a video
about slivers, but let's see if it's useful. This video is long (49 minutes).
Made it to 12:35 and gonna quit because it seems too low-level for our needs.

BUT NOW WE watch the video we intended to: SliverList and SliverGrid.

> Slivers are particularly useful for efficiently scrolling thru
> large numbers of children

This makes us (again) think we're going too low-level.

BUT at 1:08 "SliverGrid.extent(crossAxisExtent: 90.0)" the extent constructor?


[linkQL]: https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/CustomScrollView/slivers.html
[linkQF]: https://dartpad.dev/workshops.html?webserver=https://dartpad-workshops-io2021.web.app/getting_started_with_slivers_HX->_X22
[linkQR]: https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/SliverGrid-class.html
[linkQM]: https://api.flutter.dev/flutter/widgets/GridView-class.html


# (document-meta)

- #birth
